Welcome back!
Now, we are going to have
a large number of microservices
running at some point
and we want to introduce some
insight in order into that.
Without any additional tooling,
what your microservices
landscape looks like?
It's basically just the
diagram we see here.
There's a larger number
of potential connections,
but without any clear
indication who's calling what,
when to perform whatever action.
So what we ideally want is something that
tells us that when user
invokes Service 1,
that one in turn invokes Service
2 which cascades the Service 3
and then Services 9 and
10 also getting invoked.
Right!
But if possible, actually,
it would be even better if we could
be in the position which allows us to
reassemble a service call graph
to see which services,
for example, are called
directly from Service A.
And then which services refer
to other services in what way?
Either in sequence, in
parallel, and so on.
It's actually possible to
do that by implementing
the or by using an implementation of
the OpenTracing API
with your application.
Distributed tracing,
actually is specifically designed to
allow developers and administrators
to trace calls and visualize
them when they are traversing
a number of microservices.
So it's very important to understand
the sequence of those calls, of course,
because every invocation changes
the payload that is manipulated by the
application in some way or another.
And of course, not just the sequence,
but also the duration of those calls
and the manner or the parallelism
level they are made in.
So if 2 invocations are
performed in sequence,
then the latency associated with each of
those services is added
on top of the response time.
Whereas if we are invoking
services in parallel,
then obviously the longer one
is the amount of time
that adds up to the total response.
It's much easier to identify
the culprit of slow responses,
of potential errors in
responses and so on,
if you have distributed
tracing implemented.
The way distributed tracing is
defined is, it introduces 2 terms,
that of a span and that of a trace.
A trace is basically a
total execution path of a single
service invocation in the mesh.
So when a user invokes the service,
it starts a trace.
And then whichever other microservices are
involved in the resolution of
the initial user's request,
become a part of that same trace.
Each path of a request
wherever it happens,
downstream and back to the
originator of that request,
which obviously receives a
response then is called a span.
So traces consists of multiple spans
but also spans can contain other spans.
Let's have a look at that. With the
call graph that we are seeing here,
so Service A invokes
Services B and E in turn.
And then Service B forwards that
work to Services C and D as well.
The total trace would
look something like this.
So if we have the time on the x scale
and the trace levels on the y scale,
the first invocation is that of Span A.
So when the user makes
a request to Service A,
it starts a span that
actually incorporates all the
other requests in this trace.
Service A then invokes
Service B and starts Span B,
which is the total amount of
time the Service B needs for
its own processing before it
returns a response to Service A.
And then Span B contains 2 other span,
Span C and Span D,
where Service B is invoking
Server C waiting for
its response and then in turn invoking
Service D and waiting for
its response before it's
able to return the response
back to Service A.
So in the relationship
of these spans,
Span A contains Span B and C and D,
or a Span B contains Span C and D.
And then of course, the last
request is to service E,
which returns and terminating Span A,
also enables Span A to terminate.
One of the very popular
tracing platforms which
uses these approaches
is called Jaeger.
Jaeger allows developers to configure
services to enrich the requests and
responses, so as to allow
gathering of the runtime statistics
about their performance.
Jaeger is made out of several components.
They all work together to collect,
store, and display tracing data.
Now, the component that
you will probably be working with
the most is the Jaeger Client.
The Jaeger Client is basically
the language specific
implementation because Jaeger
has support for many different languages.
The client is the language specific
implementation of the OpenTracing API.
It is the client that adds the
additional headers to request
that allow us to establish that
span x is part of a trace 1,
2, 3 and is contained by span y.
These additional headers
have to be collected though,
by some sort of a data collector
and is the client actually that also
forwards the information about what span
IDs it has assigned to a certain request
and what traces they are a part of?
It reports that to Jaeger Agent.
Jaeger Agent is a network service that
listens for information
about span data,
which is generally sent
using UDP protocol.
And then batches the data it receives from
the client and sends that
to the Jaeger Collector.
Collector receives runtime statistics from
multiple agents and places them
into internal queue for processing,
which in turn ends up in the storage.
So the Jaeger collector requires a
persistent storage backend otherwise,
obviously all the tracing
data will be lost,
when we restart the collector.
The Query is then a service that
retrieves runtime statistics
from storage on request
and the Jaeger Console
is a console that can
visualize queries about tracing data
that are stored in the Jaeger collector.
In Quarkus applications,
you can enable tracing by adding
quarkus-smallrye-opentracing dependency,
either using Maven add extension or
adding it manually in the pom.xml file.
Then you enable tracing related properties
in the application.properties file,
There are a number of
quarkus.jaeger properties.
Most important one is to name
your application uniquely so that
you can distinguish it from others.
And then choose a sampler type and
specific sample, specific parameters.
There are several sampler types,
like const, which collects all
the data from all the requests.
Probabilistic, which uses
random sampling, rate limited,
which collects samples at a specific
configurable rate of samples per second.
And remote, which means that
sampling is controlled from Jaeger
backend.
You should be very careful with
the constant sampler because it
generates immense amounts of data
and shouldn't be using production whenever
there is at least some significant
amount of traffic involved.
Now, depending on the sampler type,
sampler-param might have
different meanings,
but for the const sampler,
it is just percentage of requests
that spans should be collected for.
It should be a value between 0 and 1,
where 0 means no sample collection and
1 means collect all the samples.
The next property is the endpoint.
The endpoint is basically
the Jaeger agent or
the collector that the sample
information should be sent to.
And then we have the propagation level,
which is actually the depth to which
headers that are added by
the Jaeger client will be
reported back to the collector.
b3 means that this is
the third level of headers and it's
required to allow us not
just to attribute spans,
to a trace, but also to reconstruct the
parent-child relationship in terms of
which span contains other spans
and then what spans do these
spans further contain?
If you want to log the spans that
were reported in the application,
you can also turn reports or
log spans property to true.
So it's sufficient to just
add the quarkus-smallrye-
opentracing extension to
your project and configure
application.properties if all
you want is collect samples
related to REST invocations.
So,
anything that your applications
received from external clients,
starts to trace any subsequent
further invocations
of other microservices,
then create spans until the
initial request is resolved.
So these 2 steps are enough
to enable this kind of tracing.
However, if you want to trace,
for example, the internals
of method invocations,
like, for example, what methods has
a REST endpoint method
in your service class
invoked in the data object
access class for example.
Then in that case, you would need
to annotate select classes and
methods in your services
with the @Traced annotation.
And that will also
create additional data
that can be reported
back to the Jaeger collector.
You can view the traces and spans
that had been generated by our
application using the Jaeger web console,
probably the easiest way of running
it is by running it in a container.
There is an image called all-in-one
available from quay.io/
jaegertracing that actually has
all the components that we need
for a minimal Jaeger deployment.
So including the collector,
including the query and
of course the console,
they are all present in that one image.
All we need to do is simply
expose the ports that Jaeger
needs to collaborate with the client
and then open the console on ports 16686,
which looks a little bit like this.
So in this console, on the left-hand side,
we have the trace query section where
we can choose what service we
want to see the traces from,
what operations we want
to see the traces from?
If there are any tags, you
can search by the tag.
You can select how much, whatever
time window you want to review.
And then of course,
other properties such as
minimum duration of a request,
maximum duration of the request
and request the result limiter.
Once you have selected your parameters,
you can click Find Traces and you will
get a trace graph here showing you
how many requests have been traced
throughout or over the time
window that you have selected.
Then below that graph you will see
how many traces have been or
you will see individual traces
that have been collected.
Then once you click one of
the traces in that list,
you will be able to review the
exact path of the request,
looking at the spans that it created
and then of course, the sub
spans that it contains.
Let's move on to the exercise where
we add tracing capabilities
to our application.